---
title: 'Center of Mass of $N$ Points in Space'
date: 2023-09-22
permalink: /posts/2023/08/points/
tags:
  - linear algebra
---

Recently, a friend introduced me to a problem posed by Presh Talwalkar in a video [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bDBkySkS1aI&ab_channel=MindYourDecisions). The problem is as follows. Take an equilateral triangle and inscribe a circle into it. Pick any point $P$ on the circle and connect line segments from $P$ to each of the vertices. The challenge is to show that the sum of the squares of the lengths is actually a constant, independent of the placement of $P$. The video gives a nice proof of the fact but when one studies it more closely, we see that we can actually generalize the statement quite a bit.

First of all, it turns out that it's not important that the radius of the circle happens to inscribe the triangle. You can take any radius $R$ for the circle so long as it's still centered at the middle of triangle. But also, it's not important that the points be arranged in this equilateral-triangular way. Indeed, so long as the circle is centered at the center of mass of the three points, the statement is still true. And it doesn't have to be three points; it can be any number of points $N$. Lastly, it doesn't even have to be in the plane, it can be in any $(k+1)$-dimensional space and you just ask that $P$ be on a $k$-sphere. So to summarize:

**Proposition:** Consider any collection of $N$ points $Q_1,...,Q_N$ in $\mathbb{R}^{k+1}$ and let $C$ be the center of mass of these points. That is, viewing the points as vectors, $C = \frac{1}{N} \sum^N_{i=1} Q_i$. Take a point $P$ that sits on a $k$-sphere of any radius, centered at $C$. Then the following sum is constant, independent of where $P$ is placed: $\sum^N_{i=1} \|P - Q_i\|^2$.

My friend made an excellent Desmos widget [here](https://www.desmos.com/geometry/9ix8mi7pw2) which shows the situation in $\mathbb{R}^2$ with $N$ points and any radius circle. There is a slider to change $N$, another for the "spread" of the points, and also one to change the radius $R$. With that all fixed, one can change the location of $P$ on the circle and observe that the sum of the lengths squared, is unchanged.

Here is a sketch of a proof of the statement. Without loss of generality, one can assume that the center of mass is at the origin. This is because coordinates aren't intrinsic to Euclidean space and also, the whole proposition doesn't change if you translated all the points simultaneously to the origin (or applied any other isometry). Then, to write out the lengths squared, one can use, say, the dot product and you'll find there are three types of terms. The first are those coming from $\|P\|^2 = R^2$ and so it doesn't depend on the location of $P$. Remember, a $k$-sphere centered at 0 with radius $R$ satisfies the equation $x^2_1+...+x_{k+1}^2 = R^2$.

There are also terms $\|Q_i\|^2$ which depend only on the location of the points and not at all dependent on $P$. Lastly, there are the cross terms but when you collect them all together, you'll find that it amounts to a dot product $P \cdot \sum^N_{i=1} Q_i$. But the sum here is just the center of mass times $N$ and since $C = 0$, then the cross terms vanish. 

This proposition is very straightforward to state and also to prove but it's also a proposition I don't think I could come up with on my own. It's maybe only after experimenting a bit with, say, Desmos, that one notices some of these patterns and formulates the proposition.
